So, Mac, welcome to Talk Python To Me.
Awesome to have you here.
Hey, thank you, Michael, for the introduction.
I'm happy to be here.
Excited.
Yeah, I'm pretty excited to be talking about medicine and all the stuff that you guys are
doing with Python.
I really like these kinds of shows because I think it's important to highlight that Python
is not just for web developers and pure data science machine learning people, but it's
used by this huge spectrum of people doing all sorts of interesting stuff and solving
real problems with it.
It sounds like you fall pretty solidly in that category.
Yeah, absolutely.
It was like Python has been sort of this discovery as I've gone through my career as a physician.
And it's interesting how to begin with, when computer science, initially when I was training
and growing up, it was hard to imagine medicine and computer science being hand in hand together.
But now I think things have progressed and there's a lot of technology that's now in
there in medicine that allows you to do all these fascinating things.
And of course, as I've discovered Python, it brings in kind of the toolkit and the ability
to be able to achieve and solve problems in a way that I think it's not been envisioned
before.
So it's a very exciting time.
Yeah, it is a very exciting time.
And I think it's just getting better and better.
Before we get too far into this, tell people a quick bit about yourself.
Quick introduction.
Yeah, absolutely.
So I'm Somath Roy.
I am a molecular pathologist.
It's a type of physician who deals with looking at the genome of either a patient or a patient's
tissue.
And we essentially look at all of these things in a way to be able to help manage a patient's
treatment.
In my current position, I am an associate professor and the director of molecular pathology
at Cincinnati Children's Hospital.
My lab is a clinical lab that is under the division of pathology.
And we do a lot of work that pertains to kids in terms of helping them diagnose and manage
pediatric cancer, as well as infectious disease that happen in this age group.
Molecular pathology, I essentially trained back in India as a physician with my MD.
Then I came here, started in Pittsburgh.
I did my training in pathology and lab medicine.
I specialized in molecular pathology.
Then I was there in Pittsburgh.
I worked for some time and then opened Cincinnati Children's.
Excellent.
Do you work directly with patients or do you get samples sent to you from other doctors
and then you process them and analyze them?
Yeah, that's a good question.
So I do not work with patients directly.
It's a subspecialty in medicine where my lab works with the samples that have been collected
in the patient either from the OR or a procedure or from the radiology suite.
And then we work on that tissue or the blood sample or bone marrow sample that comes to
us.
And yes, then all the testing that we perform is off from that specimen.
And then once we generate the clinical reports back, they go back to the patient's chart
and to the patients, to the clinicians who are treating and managing them.
And then that way it helps how they're able to then get a diagnosis and then give the
appropriate treatment and the management to the patient.
Yeah, excellent.
So yeah, you must see a lot of different stuff flying through the lab you have to analyze.
So how did you go from, I'm studying medicine to I'm writing Python code and running automation?
And what was that process like?
Well, that was an interesting journey for me.
So before medicine and biology came into my life, I started off, it was second grade,
I believe, when my dad, he got me a computer at that time, which is a 64 kilobyte small
machine.
So I think it was Toshiba MSX computers where you could write like GW basic code and some
basic predefined hex code and you can run small applications on that.
That was my starting point.
It was super exciting for me.
And I think from there on, the journey went into, as I went through high school and then
college, medicine was, I would say, biology was something that intrigued me.
And at the same time, I also got interested in genetics, looking at DNA sequences.
And I had a natural liking for the fact that I could study about the cell, about the genome,
the DNA and RNA.
But also I realized that there was a lot of math and computation that you can use to slice
and dice data.
And at that time, the place that I grew in India was a very small place.
So we didn't have access to resources like internet.
So my exposure to internet was when I actually went to med school for the first time.
Oh yeah, you can actually connect to other computers.
So that's when I started my medicine.
So obviously I did my training in medicine in medical school back in India.
That's when I started to connect and talk to a lot of people.
And some of my friends who actually were already writing apps at that time using Java applets
and browsers.
And so I started to make some connection in terms of images and learning how some of those
things can be used in medicine.
And so during my radiology rotation, that was my first real life-- that was my realization
that actually in medicine, you can use computers a lot to handle a lot of these images, x-rays,
CT scans.
And I think as it went on, when I came to the US, that's where it really started off.
During my residency in pathology here, I actually connected with my mentors, Dr. Anil Parwani
and Dr. Leonard Pentamortz.
They are well-known pathology informaticists.
They've spent a lot of their time sort of dwelling in the world of pathology, medicine,
and computer science.
And so that is when I could actually realize that, yes, you can do a lot of innovative
stuff by developing apps, algorithms, analyzing either image data or molecular data.
And so that is when I started to put into designing an app, which was-- it's a very
simple web app that was a project I was working with one of my mentors.
And so his idea was that we had a lot of these pathology images, and we wanted to create
a little in-browser app that would display these images as thumbnails, and then clicking
the art that could enlarge the image, show it on display.
And so I used-- at that time, it was .NET framework to be ASP.NET.
And so I created a little app using Visual Basic.
Slowly, I then migrated to using C# in the same environment.
And that time, I started my advanced fellowship training in molecular pathology.
That's when I started there.
That's when I realized there is a lot of genomic sequencing data, where essentially you're
dealing with a lot of strings and numbers.
And you have to make a lot of sense in terms of this large volume of data that comes in.
If we're working with-- so the kind of data that you're working with for, say, this genetic
stuff?
Yes.
So for us, when you're studying the genomics, how much data is in, say, one strand of DNA?
How much of that do you actually care about?
Give us a sense of how much data we're talking.
Right.
So it really depends on what is being done.
And so when we look at-- so when we talk about genomics, it is really designed on how the
experiment is done.
So for example, if you just simply look at the entire human genome, we are talking about
3 billion alphabets.
Essentially, it's the combination of four alphabets, A, T, G, and C. So these are the
four nucleotides of the DNA sequence.
And the RNA has one additional one, which replaces A. But the idea is that it's a mix
and match of these sequences.
And so if you think about the entire human genome as a single thread of A, T, G, and
Cs in various combinations, you're looking at 3 billion alphabets.
And so what happens is when we do these sequencing experiments where you would take the DNA molecule
from a bunch of cells within a tissue, and then either we read all the 3 billion base
pairs-- and typically, the way the sequencing is done is you read all of these sequences
and from many molecules.
And so you'll have multiple copies of that when you're translating from a molecular--
like a chemical molecular structure to a DNA sequence on, say, a black file in a file system.
So if you look at that large scale of data, like the entire genome, we are talking of
hundreds of gigabytes, maybe even terabyte worth of data.
Then there are other more practical approaches when we look at the genome.
And especially this is something that we use for day-to-day patient care, which is referred
to as targeted sequencing.
What that means is instead of the 3 billion base pairs, we focus on those regions of the
human genome that are of most pertinent use, or that we, at least as the current field
of genomics, that we understand what to do with.
And so there are certain genes that, at least in the space I work with, cancer genomics,
that are, I would say, close to about maybe 1,000 to 2,000 genes which are known to be
cancer-associated.
And of that, roughly about 500 to 700 genes are where we know that they have been studied
and demonstrated that there are certain types of abnormalities in those genes in terms of
the sequence changes, that they have certain meaning in context of tumor in order to make
a diagnosis or to understand if the tumor is aggressive or benign, or if there are certain
treatments that could be applied to those tumors.
And that's specifically linked to the kind of sequence change you see in that region
of the genome.
And we are talking about, practically speaking, when we talk about the targeted testing that
we do, it's a very small fraction of the large genome.
Typically, there's a term known as exome sequencing.
And exome sequencing refers to sequencing all those regions of the human genome where
it at least encodes for one or the other annotated gene.
That is typically about 1% to 2% of the entire gene.
And so if we further narrow it down to about, say, 500, 600 genes that one would typically
sequence for clinical cancer molecular testing, I would say that's probably about a tenth,
or maybe slightly less than that, of the genome.
But it's a very high yield from a clinical standpoint.
The most alteration you will find that would help with the clinical treatment is high.
So if you're going to talk about that data set, it's complex in a different way, because
just looking at the raw sequence data would be somewhere in, I would say, 1 to 20 gigs
from a single sequence file.
But it entirely depends on how deep we go.
So for example, when we talk about sequencing, as I mentioned before, when we sequence a
molecule, we can sequence it either at certain depths.
That means what level of redundancy you want to be able to read that molecule.
Sometimes we read the molecules 20 to 30 times.
So that's referred to as 30x.
Or sometimes we'll read that 500 times.
So that would be 500x.
Because you want to make sure you don't misread the...
Yes.
So, right.
So what happens is the greater the depth of sequence, so typically for such large panels
that we sequence in a clinical setting, we usually target about 1500x to 2000x.
That means we're reading that 2000 times.
So the more the depth it is, the possibility of identifying a certain variation or genomic
alteration that is present at a very low level.
For example, say, you have a tumor cell and within that, only 2% of the cells have this
mutation.
Others don't.
And so when you're looking for or hunting for these needles in a haystack, you really
want to maximize the amount of depth you have to be able to pick those things up.
So it really depends on how deep we go.
The more deep we go, the more data it is.
And so it can scale up to almost several hundred gigabytes.
Sure.
Yeah, I've always wondered about how you can go and read somebody's genetics and then
not make a mistake when you're reading it, using chemicals to read.
So it's really ridiculous how much data is there.
Off by one, a C for a G or whatever is a bad thing, right?
Right.
But it is, you know, I think as the technology has matured, there's always, there's nothing
100% in terms of the error profile for the enzyme that has been used to work, the technology
that is reading the actual fluorescence, converting that to signal.
There's always statistical values and probabilities that are associated with what is the probability
that it is wrong or incorrect or correct.
But within that frame and where the current technology is, it's pretty accurate for, if
not all, many of the regions of the genome.
And so it's mind-boggling how it works.
Yeah, it really is quite amazing.
It's one of the modern marvels of science for sure.
It is, it is.
Yeah.
So I think you're a little bit unusual, a little bit weird in the sense that you got
into as your first sort of programming thing to bring to apply to your science and medicine
side of things was C# rather than, or VB.NET rather than something like Python or R or
something.
So maybe talk a bit about that experience, contrast it with Python.
Like why do you, why do you end up moving to Python?
Yeah.
So, you know, I think the reason I started using VB.NET C# was I would say most, it was
probably influenced a lot by at the time when I was doing my med school in India, what was
available at that time.
It was not something I would just go to the internet and start getting a lot of resources
as one would do now.
So it was pretty much like, this is the book I have available and that's about to learn
Python.
That's the only thing.
So you start.
Yeah.
And then, but the thing is when I started applying C# and it was mostly C# and a little
bit of C++, I started to get into like with some of the non-genetic stuff initially while
the project was working on.
It was not too bad because I was able to accomplish most of the tasks.
But then once I got into genomics and I came, so the way, you know, professionals who get
into genomics and molecular pathology, there are a couple of different routes.
So either the physician, people who are physician trained and they kind of have a formal background
in medicine and they kind of do a specialized training and then they become molecular pathologist
after getting board certified.
There's the other route, which is more of a research background where people have spent
a lot of their time in really deep research.
They've learned a lot of genomics hands on, either from a computational background or
from a more laboratory, like a wet laboratory background.
And so they've spent, you know, they've obviously done their PhDs and postdoc training and then
sort of coming to the molecular pathology field.
People starting there tend to have more of a formal computational training.
So they're getting, you know, they usually get, obviously when you start with a research
lab, R, Python are sort of like the most common tools that are used for any kind of data analysis
and data visualization.
Coming from more of a foreign medicine background, typically when we get training in clinical
informatics or pathology informatics, often it is very, you know, kind of, I would not
say corporate based, but very formal application development space.
So it's a lot of, you know, Windows based, .NET, C#, C++, that kind of thing.
So
Yeah, Java or .NET is a perfect choice.
Yeah.
Okay.
In bioinformatics, at least in genomics bioinformatics, kind of the ecosystem of tools available,
it's a mishmash of everything.
For anything which is very computationally intensive, like when you're trying to align
sequences to the human genome, those are very intensive tasks.
And typically it's a lot of, you know, C, C++, Java, that's involved in some of these
very mainstream tools that are available.
More recently, I think we are seeing Rust coming into the picture as well.
There's some Golang applications.
And then of course, Python and R are the predominant, I think, tools, the program language that
are used to solve a lot of these problems.
So when I sort of started my molecular pathology fellowship and I got into, now I had to do
this project that involved, you know, manipulating all the sequence data to a point where we
would be able to develop an application that would help sort of, you know, it's a web based
application that would help, you know, for other pathologists and faculty to read that
sequencing data and, you know, digest in a very way that's easy for them to look at it
rather than going to the Linux, you know, terminal and opening up like, you know, raw
files and things like that.
So I used, that was my first project was to use C# in that context.
But I quickly realized that there was a lot of these algorithms that were natively either
written in R or Python, and then having to, you know, incorporate those functionalities
was not as easily possible.
So I had to rewrite a lot of those things in C# primarily.
You know, it was a good learning curve, but I think from a main derivative perspective
was getting really difficult.
And so that's when the realization was that I think the combination of Linux and Python
was, you know, I had to move towards it.
Yeah.
C#, probably from the timeframe that you're thinking about, didn't really have a great
package manager story, not to the same degree that Python does, although they do pretty
good now over in the China land.
Right.
Yeah.
All right.
So Chris, in the audience says, is there a reason to use Python specifically?
Like, are there some special sauce packages that make it attractive?
It sounds like that's kind of what you were getting at.
Like you found more solutions to these algorithms than, you know, available in Python than in
C#.
Yeah.
Whatever languages.
Right.
So I think, I mean, I think the simple answer is yes.
I think the community and the amount of work that has been done in this particular space
with genomics, I mean, when you are really searching for applications, it kind of falls
into these three categories of, you know, anything which is a high performance compiling,
you know, program that is usually in the Rust, you know, C++, C, a lot of, you know, those
languages, a little bit of Rust and Java.
And then the other bin is essentially kind of, you know, split up into Python and R.
I think for me, Python was, and I think I'm sure others have shared the same way, where
it's almost like, wow, this is amazing.
Like coming from C#, it was a little bit of a change because there's no more, like, you
know, curly braces and think about the whole things.
Did you always use semicolons?
Kind of.
Like even now, sometimes when I write like a little bit of JavaScript, I'm like, oh yeah,
okay, semicolons here.
But not too bad.
I think what I got onto was like the simplicity of the language and how powerful it was when
like, if I'm thinking about, you know, it was interesting when I had to do something
like there was an algorithm that I had to parse out certain, you know, strings in a
way where it required some known workflows that we use to do like variant annotations
when we are cross-referencing databases and putting them together.
You know, when you look for in terms of like C# packages, I mean, there's really nothing
there for it natively to do it.
So you have to write a lot of those things.
In Python, it's the amount of time that is spent in developing those things is much faster.
Like the development time itself is quick because you either get an idea of somebody
who's already done the work or there's a more formal package that you can use.
So I think initially when I started off, my Python was a very interesting collection of
packages.
It was like a tool suite essentially written to, you know, to have all these functions
available for very common day-to-day tasks.
You know, I want to query certain region of the, you know, BAM file or I want to parse
out certain things in the FASTQ file to look at, you know, some of the sequences or doing,
you know, you know, counting number of sequences in a given file and, you know, getting read
counts, things like that was, it's all out of the box.
And so that was sort of like the first thing that, "Oh wow, this is amazing."
And you can just say, "Somebody's already done the work."
And you can just put it on top of it.
So it was very cool.
Instead of creating these, I'll just like use those.
Perfect.
Right.
So that was one.
And the other motivation to use Python was, you know, say for example, why not R?
You know, why Python?
Because R offers a very rich ecosystem in, you know, at least in genomics and visualization.
So I think the second thing was in terms of the idea that I was working on was having
to develop a web application and all of these bioinformatics, you know, toolings and algorithms
running sort of in the back.
And so at that time it was like, okay, well, you know, Python, I've not heard much about
in terms of web application.
Mostly it was, you know, again, this big, like, you know, C#, .NET, that was why I started
off, you know, with that.
But then at that time, you know, there was Django and then Flask was sort of coming in.
It was a very minimalistic, you know, sort of application.
So I started focusing on that.
It was very easy with Flask to, you know, get up and running with very simple, you know,
applications to do that.
I didn't try much into Django just because it was too bloated for me.
But you know, Flask was great.
And then what I realized was you can create a simple web application, but then at the
same time you can use all your, you know, myPythons and all the wonderful myMathematics
packages in the backend.
So it's like a single language that lets you do both.
And so this is great.
It was just, I don't have to go anywhere to learn, you know, a third or a fourth or a
fifth different program language and this just gets job done.
Yeah.
Keep it in mind that your actually main, your main job is medicine, not programming, right?
It's not like you're a CS person who's just all after, out to learn all the languages,
right?
Yeah.
So that definitely is.
And again, that's a, that's a huge, you know, I would say I'm, again, as I said, I'm in
a, I'm sort of in an unusual position where I'm, you know, a physician, but I also do
a lot of these application developments.
So that certainly is an important point in terms of how much time I have to be able to
develop these prototypes.
And then obviously, you know, typically the way it works is at least right now here, you
know, where I am currently working, I have an excellent and amazing team of developers
and bioinformations who really do a lot of the development work on the front end, back
end.
And so for me to be able to take additional time out of my, you know, the clinical and
the patient care work is limited.
So if I can get whatever prototype I'm thinking of or developing the application fast, then,
you know, that's, that's what I'm going for.
Right.
Then you can hand it off to the team and let them polish it up and product, make it production
ready basically.
Yeah.
I was wondering how much time of your, your job do you get to spend on these kinds of
things, you know, finding new packages, optimizing or improving the ways that you're working
on stuff versus just sort of handing it off to the folks you work with and, and keeping,
you know, focus more on the medicine side.
Yeah.
So it you know, that, that I think it's a good question.
I think it's it's evolved over time as I've been sort of, you know, when I was in training
and then being a faculty and then in a fact in this new position you know, one of the
things I did was as part of my certification was to, you know, to get board certified in
clinical informatics.
That's a discipline by itself that involves a lot of, you know, it's a very broad field
in terms of informatics and healthcare.
And then one of the buckets there is, you know, software development.
And so I was you know, I was quite interested sort of in that field.
And so most of my time in terms of being able to devote to, you know, finding new packages
or trying to, you know, write up an application that could solve a problem or coming up with
prototypes was, it was done in a way that sort of aligned with the work I was doing.
And so it would be days when I'm on clinical service where I'm mostly, you know, working
on sort of with, you know, with patient care related matters.
So those weeks would be, you know, obviously very busy.
I would have, you know, I would wake up at like extremely early in the morning, spend
the first two hours, four to six a.m. just, you know, working on this.
And then I get back to like, you know, the clinical work.
And then there would be weeks when I'm off clinical service.
So I am not responsible for any patient care related work.
And those weeks would be where I would spend time in terms of, you know, doing these, you
know, investigating into sort of some of these packages and, you know, coming up with new
ideas, exploring what is all, you know, what is available in terms of certain problems
that I was solving.
And, you know, that time sort of, you know, my quote protected time professionally was
spent in that.
And so that would be, you know, maybe a week spent into like, hey, we are trying to look
into this variant amputation tool and then we want to, you know, write wrappers around
it so it becomes easy for, you know, our labs operation to be able to use that.
And so, so kind of that, that's how it works.
So some of those either early mornings or, you know, the weeks I'm off clinical services
and how, how that works.
Yeah.
Excellent.
Is it changing fast?
So I'll give you an analogy that you could tell me about your space.
So on one hand, in Python web world, you mentioned Flask and Django, you know, Flask and Django,
while they are evolving are kind of, they're kind of the way they have been and they're,
they're pretty stable.
And if you learn Flask five years ago, you're still good to use Flask today.
Or is it more like FastAPI, pedantic, message spec, just there's something new all the time
that you got to keep learning to bring in, are there a ton of new packages just coming
online or is there a set of really solid ones?
So I think it's both yes and no.
And so it depends on what, you know, what area we're working on.
So so right now in, in the clinical lab that I'm directing here, you know, when I came
here in 2020, it was, you know, when we started off from scratch.
So essentially the idea was to be able to bring up a pediatric cancer sequencing infrastructure
that was not available.
And so it was ground up from, you know, the lab to personal to space to everything.
And so we kind of have this sort of, you know, two big bubbles in, in that operation from
an informatics perspective.
One of them is the, you know, we, we essentially are in the process of developing our custom
lab information system that's essentially a web app.
And so we have that space and the other space is bioinformatics.
And so bioinformatics is a lot of, a lot of the custom scripting or the applications we
develop is Python based.
Some of them we do with the Golang, you know, when we need a little bit of performance aspect.
And then the other aspect is the web app.
So from a web app perspective, when we, when I started here, we actually started, we use
FastAPI and Python.
So that's kind of, you know, that was, so, you know, the idea was that, well, you know,
since you're starting from scratch and I came to know about FastAPI at that point of time,
the whole thing was about, you know, a single way that was, you know, I was pretty much
sold on, on, on that aspect.
And then, you know, I think the whole tool set made a lot of sense.
I'm like, okay, well this is, this is perfect time to be able to, I think when I started
FastAPI was, you know, 0.5 or 0.6.
And so now obviously you can see a lot of change happening there.
So yeah, that, that definitely is a lot of, you know, fast pace.
And so we kind of do catching up in a sense where it has to be done in a, in a, in a careful
way.
The reason is because from, you know, as compared to more traditional research lab testing,
where at the end really, you know, there's a lot of discovery, there's a lot of excitement
at the end, it all translates into being sort of, you know, the data is presented at a conference
or you publish that as a manuscript and that's the end point.
So if you move off from version one to version three of algorithm, you know, you have to
obviously make sure that your research, everything is reproducible, but beyond that is not a
problem.
But when we're talking about the same thing in context of a clinical care for a patient,
the room for error is very, very little.
You can't make mistakes.
And so the entire space of clinical testing is very regulated in that sense, because there's
a lot of requirement that, you know, you have to perform that any change that's happened
in your pipeline.
So you're using, you know, some version of an application.
Now you operate to a newer version.
You have to demonstrate that the analytical performance in terms of sensitivity and specificity
for that pipeline didn't change.
And so a lot of work is needed when you go do like a version upgrade.
So we keep those things very controlled and careful versus some other things which are
more in the R&D space.
There's a little bit more room to play around with tools.
Right.
Yeah.
Chris was asking an audience a great question about basically, is it more exploratory and
you just move really fast and don't really worry about tests and stuff like that.
It sounds like this is more of a production type thing.
Like if you're going to run it over and over and if it gives a different answer at some
point for testing for a disease or something that's really bad.
You need it to be right all the time.
And so.
Yes.
So the rule is when we do new test developments or we bring a new algorithm, obviously that
part of which we refer to, there's a formal term that we use in lab medicines called familiarization
and optimization or ONF phase.
That's where, you know, there's a lot of flexibility, new tools, new version, trying out different
things.
And then it goes from that into the validation phase.
And then once we deploy the application, once the deployment is there, it's a production
application.
We don't touch it unless something really has to be tinkered with or there's a bug that
we have to fix.
Who's in charge of running those apps?
Is that people on your team and your lab or is that the hospital or how?
Yeah.
So the way it is set up here is, so when I started off, I was the end of one.
So I started off with the FastAPI application.
I had to build up the, we had a bioinformatics pipeline that I had initially authored.
But then when we went through the validation phase, I luckily had two people on staff who
kind of were handling the bioinformatics on the front end.
And then eventually we had a third person who joined the team.
So then they were kind of helping me out with a lot of the actual groundwork of writing
the code, getting tests done, going through the validation data, summarizing that for
me.
Being a lab director, it is my responsibility ultimately to sign off on all those things
and say, "Hey, okay, this is the validation and this is what is being demonstrated that
your package or your pipeline or whatever you're working on demonstrates this level
of sensibility."
Then yes, I being a lab director say that, "Yes, this is working."
And once that happens, so we then deploy those applications in production.
We use GitHub and the usual dev, test, prod, pipeline.
So that's kind of how it works.
Cool.
Do you have your own hardware or do you have stuff like on DigitalOcean or AWS?
So with healthcare data, there is generally a little bit of angst with data sitting on
cloud outside the support institution.
I would say the institution that I work on is very, that way it's quite very forward
thinking and being able to use modern technology.
So what we started off and since it was everything being built up from scratch, we are taking
the decision to keep things on-prem for beginning.
But we also kept in mind that at some point of time, if the institution decides that,
"Oh, we're going to switch our infrastructure to using AWS or Azure or whatever the platform
is going to be," we want it to be ready.
And so the way we had it set up, and this is due to our amazing IS team here at our
institution.
So we had our own hardware that we got in terms of the actual servers.
And we collaborated with the IS team to be able to help us build our Kubernetes infrastructure.
So we have a test and a prod Kubernetes cluster, and then all our apps and the bioinformatics
pipeline.
Well, the apps for now and the bioinformatics pipeline that we're looking forward in the
near future to get deployed on these things.
As a matter of fact, what we've done is our dev team, we do a lot of the development on
Kubernetes as well.
And then we keep moving all these things as containerized applications.
That's excellent.
So really embracing containers and Docker and Kubernetes, that should make it super
easy to move to wherever you want to go, right?
Anything that can run Kubernetes, you just push to that and you're good to go.
Right, right.
And it's a little bit difficult to start with, but I think once we are in that stream,
it is much less effort to move things around.
Yeah, last year I rewrote all of our servers and APIs and condensed six to eight servers
all into one Docker cluster.
And it was a great decision.
But to me, it was also a little intimidating to say, well, here's one more thing I layer,
I have to manage and understand.
And if something goes wrong there, then everything else still breaks.
So having it set up is really nice once you get used to it.
Yes, right.
All right, let's talk a bit about, well, I have a question for you.
I want to talk about some of these packages that you've been saying are a lot of the reasons
you chose Python and use a lot.
It's great.
But before we get there, I got the biopython.org website pulled up.
And the very first line is, "Biopython is a set of freely available tools."
You know, open source, freely available.
How much does that matter to you guys?
On one hand, you have a ton of money being in the medical space.
It's really high stakes.
So paying for commercial software or commercial libraries is probably not the biggest worry.
On the other hand, open source is really nice.
Being able to look inside is really nice.
Free means you don't have to deal with getting permission.
How does that fit into your world?
I know how it fits into small startups and things like that.
But for a hospital, for example, what does free and open source mean to you guys?
I think it does have a lot of impact in terms of how we end up working and setting up these
things.
And obviously, whatever I'm speaking is representing what it means from an operational standpoint.
When we talk about molecular pathology, generally being able to bring up a clinical service
like that is a huge investment.
And so a lot of the investment is...
And this is generally applicable to any institution where something like this has been set up
for patient care or clinical use.
The investment is primarily in a lot of the instrumentation and the reagents that we use
are generally quite expensive, which is sort of the...
I would say when we talk about what is the cost of a test when it's offered, that cost
factors in a lot of these operational costs that we need to buy these expensive sequencing
instruments, the reagents that are used as consumables as we do the test over and over
again every week, every month.
So from that standpoint, traditionally, the way things have been designed is, I would
say 10 years back when we would work with our finance team to say, "Okay, the cost of
the test is going to be so and so based on all of these different inputs."
And so 10 years back, computation, bioinformatics, all of these were not factored in at all.
But now as we are in that era where using GPUs on a regular basis to be able to do simple...
I would not say simple, but routine work to get from the raw sequence data to be able
to identify genomic variants, that's getting common.
Using FPGAs, using large clusters to be able to perform these tasks.
And so now we are starting to see those costs getting in as part of the ultimate cost that
goes to the patient for a test.
And so we try to minimize those things.
One of the way to be able to minimize those things is to be able to choose between free
open source versus something which is a commercial product.
And it's always a balance between the reliability and the service that you're able to get back
saying, "Hey, something breaks down.
We know there's an SLA, there's a certain assurance that this thing is going to be able
to have help," versus open source free would be where we feel very confident in the code
base.
Sometimes what happens is when we use some of these open source tools, we end up almost
invariably having some wrapper around it to change things or being able to have some insight
into the source code.
So it depends on that balance, what we choose.
How often do you fork it and use your self-maintained version versus just run what is publicly on
PyPI and then maybe wrap it to orchestrate it a bit?
So I would say for the web application part of it, we don't really do a lot of forking.
We kind of go with what it is.
The only thing what we do is, since we have the luxury of using a combination of GitHub
and containers, and knowing the fact that the regulatory requirements require that you
tightly version control all these things with history and all those things, we tend to,
when we are developing these things, when we are validating it, before we do that, we
try to stick to a fairly stable version.
So for example, things like beta or release candidates, we try to stay away from that,
even if they have some desirable features, but unless we see a full production version
of that, we don't tend to switch to it.
So we keep things like that without maintaining or without forking or making modifications.
When we get into more of the bioinformatics stuff, where we are actually trying to use
an algorithm to solve a particular piece of part of the pipeline that is doing some data
transformation, it depends on how much we want to change or modify.
That's when we sometimes fork it.
Sometimes we fork where we know that, and this is kind of the unfortunate reality in
many of the scenarios where you have great open source tool, but after some time, due
to whatever financial or business or other reasons that they stop maintaining.
And so essentially we kind of get into this freeze mode.
We tend to fork that, so at least we have that available.
And then if we make any changes that we kind of keep it to that fork.
But generally I would say it's probably in the 80-20 where 20% is where we fork it, make
some change.
Most of the times we try not to do that.
But yes, open source free tools have a big impact.
A lot of the tools that we use as part of our bioinformatics pipeline, as a matter of
fact, which is kind of used in the community of molecular pathology to build these bioinformatics
pipeline, they tend to use a lot of open source tools.
And the reason for that is, for example, it's not written in Python, but there's an algorithm
called BWA.
It's written by Professor Heng Lee.
That's one of the algorithms that is almost like a de facto, I would say, when it comes
to doing sequence alignment.
That's a part of the pipeline.
And so it's a tried and tested application for more than a decade now.
So really there's not a...
And this is a fairly stable algorithm or application.
We don't tend to...
It's well maintained from an open source perspective.
So those obviously are highly...
We highly rely on those.
But there's this whole ecosystem of softwares that come under this rubric term of variant
calling, where we're trying to identify these different variants.
There's a whole bunch of those.
And some are fairly well maintained.
They are open source.
Sometimes depending on the context you're using, you need a license if it is used in
a commercial setting.
You don't need a license if it is in an academic setting.
For example, when we do clinical testing in institutions such as where I am right now,
that's an academic institution.
So typically it's not for profit.
And so obviously we don't need licenses for that use.
But once this goes into a pure commercial space, where if the lab is doing all of this
testing for profit, then there's a license requirement.
So we see a combination of these things showing up in the...
It's actually becoming more common now with open source tools that...
At least in the genomic bioinformatics space.
Yeah.
Oh, excellent.
I think another benefit probably for you guys, I know it's a benefit for a lot of organizations,
is if you use the open source tools and you need to hire somebody new, there's a good
chance that they have experience already with those tools.
Whereas if you use something private, expensive, you might have to teach them from scratch
what the thing is, right?
Yes, that is correct.
As a matter of fact, it's fortunate that a lot of the people who've done a lot of good
work and have contributed to the genomics bioinformatics space have...
The general tendency is whenever we are setting up any sort of pipelines for DNA sequencing,
RNA sequencing, or more from a research perspective, methylation sequencing, single cell RNA-seq,
UMI based error corrected variant calling, there's a lot of...
There's a very thriving open source space.
And so that really helps with people who come in.
Even if they're not familiar with these tools, it's easy to get familiar with because there's
a lot of community backing that up.
Or as you said, when we hire people who already are coming from a different lab or they've
had some experience, but they come and say, "Oh yeah, we know how to do alignment or I'm
aware of these applications that use that."
It is much, much easier from a learning curve perspective rather than having to now open
up a manual and this is the proprietary thing that only works here.
Yes.
Exactly.
Cool.
All right.
Well, we coordinated a bit on a list of packages that you've used in your lab or find really
helpful for your work.
And maybe we could touch on those just a little bit.
Yeah.
So CNVKit, genome-wide copy number from high throughput sequencing.
I don't know what that means, but tell us about it.
Yeah.
So copy, so CNV or copy number variation, this is a type of genomic alteration where
what happens is in a simplistic way, at least when we talk about cancer, the cancer cells
sometimes for it to be able to survive, it tries to use different ways of doing that
biologically.
One of the way to do that is certain genes that help a cell to grow in the absence of
nutrients or with very little nutrition is certain genes.
If it has more copies of those genes than normal, then it will go, okay.
It's like you have more money than expected.
You can do a lot of things.
So typically what happens is in a normal human genome, any cell that we pick up, it will
only have two copies of the gene.
One is coming from your mom, one is coming from your dad.
In cancer, what happens is in certain scenarios, if a gene that helps with growth of the cell
or it helps the cell to survive even without signal or nutrition, if it has more copies
of that, it'll make six, eight, 20, 50 copies.
It can survive versus there are certain scenarios where if there is a gene that is supposed
to regulate the cells, it doesn't go haywire.
If the cancer is able to delete one of the cells, one of the genes out, then you only
have one gene left.
You knock out a thing and then that protective mechanism is gone.
So then the cancer cell can easily survive.
So what happens is with CNV or copy number variations, the idea is that we use the high
throughput sequencing data to be able to infer how many copies of these genes do we have.
Is it more than two, is it less than two?
And so this particular package, it's a very, very well-established, well-maintained package
in the community that essentially does this thing, is you give it the sequencing data
and define the regions of the genome that you're interested in.
You can also provide names for the regions, like this region is gene B-RAF or this is
EGFR or whatever you're interested in.
And then what I do is I will do all the analysis to be able to tell you that, okay, well, when
we are comparing this particular tumor against this reference set of 20 normal samples, where
we know that you should only have two copies of the gene, in this particular tumor, we
are seeing there are 50 copies of the gene.
So it gives you kind of an output data that numerical can tell you that what it does is
it does a log-proof-based transformation of the tracing that, okay, after all this computation,
when I compare to the normal, this is 50 times more, or this is 20 times more the expected
copy, or it is half of the amount of copy we need in terms of deletions.
So that's what really it does.
And it's written in Python.
It uses a lot of, you know, Python, it has Python dependencies that use, that have been
written in sort of, you know, in either C or like, you know, Python C bindings.
But at the end, it gives you that data.
And it has an internal visualization tool, but I was not very happy with how it was written.
So I ended up writing a wrapper, which is called CNA plotter.
It's open source.
It essentially uses the end data for, from CNB kit, and then it gives you a nice visualization
of the copy numbers.
I think if you go down, if you scroll down, there's an example of this.
Yeah, you have this on GitHub.
So people can, if people want to use this, it's right there, right?
Yep, it's right there.
Yeah.
So I think at the very bottom of the images, there's screenshots there.
Oh, yeah.
Yep, right here.
Yeah.
So for example, the first image over here, you can see this, you know, it's a thin band
of all these multicolored things.
And each one of them is a single human chromosome.
So chromosome one, two, three, four, so on and so forth.
And if you look at the image, it is at, you know, the Y scale essentially is log two,
which is zero and going up, it is one, two, three, and then it's a negative scale on the
lower side.
So anything going above zero means you have more copies than two, while below is less,
you know, less than two copies.
And so if you see here in this example, the plot here, you see the very end which says
chromosome X is a single, you know, the band over here is lower at negative one.
That means this is a male patient with a single X chromosome.
As compared to females who have two, you know, two X chromosomes.
And so when we look at this plot below here, this is actually a plot from a, you know,
a cell line, a tumor cell line that is abnormal.
And here we see there are two genes which are amplified.
One of them is a gene known as TERT.
And the other gene is MDM2.
So these two genes are again, one of those examples where it gives the tumor survival
advantage over other.
And so you can see here, there are multiple copies of these genes as compared to, you
know, the baseline over here.
I see.
So that might predict something like the, how survivable the cancer is.
Right.
So if it is, is it going to be localized, say where it happened, or it's going to like
spread to other parts of the body or be difficult to treat or be resistant to treatment.
So if this is you, you want higher numbers, not lower numbers.
It all depends.
I mean, certain things are good genes, for example, you know, if there is a, there are
certain checkpoint genes, if those, those numbers, you know, if they have lower numbers,
you want to have two copies of them, because if that protective mechanism is gone, you
know, the tumor becomes very aggressive.
So it is all into context.
So if you're looking at the good genes, you want to have two copies of the good gene.
If you're looking at some of the bad genes, you don't want to have more than two copies
of the bad genes.
One or zero is better.
I got it.
Okay.
HGVS.
Yes.
So HGVS is a wonderful package.
That was initially, I think it was started by a person named Reese Hart.
He's I think he still maintains it, but there's a lot of like, you know, it's a very well
publicly maintained open source package.
It's a lot of, you know, community involvement in that as well.
So what HGVS is, it's a nomenclature system for, you know, giving a name to all these
variations.
So we're going to talk about, I'm not sure if Michael, if you've heard about the term
mutation.
So mutation is a very commonly used term that refers to some kind of abnormality in the
genome.
In this case, so what happens is there are these standards that are, that, you know,
most clinical labs follow when they're putting all of this information in the patient report
saying, okay, you know, this particular tumor has, you know, mutation in B-Ref, mutation
in EGFR, some other gene.
And there is a certain way that those mutations are described in terms of what sequence alterations
happening say at the mRNA level and what sequence alterations are happening at the protein level.
So now in your protein, you know, you're missing these amino acids or you have excess of these
amino acids or something got switched from here to there.
So there's a formal way of defining that and the guidelines of the group that defines that
is referred to as HGVS, Human Genome Variation Society.
And so it's a very complicated process where you have to do all these translations from
the genomic scale where the numbering system starts from one to like, and you know, whatever
the length of your chromosome is in terms of ATGCs and each chromosome has a different
number.
And if you have a certain alteration that is happening, say in chromosome seven at this
particular position, then you have to translate that to the mRNA of that gene and then the
protein of that gene.
So it's a lot of math, a lot of strings involved in that process.
And so essentially this HGVS Python package provides all of those functionality as a wrap.
You can create your translation, you can essentially project the variant from the genomic to the,
you know, the mRNA to a protein level or vice versa.
You can validate things.
So we ended up, I actually wrote a paper about this when we, you know, we did a validation
of how well this particular package works.
And so now, you know, in the lab that I'm currently in, we implement this thing for
generating those nomenclatures.
So what happens is when we put a report out for the, in the patient's chart and then our,
you know, say our oncology, oncologist was treating the patient, they want to know, okay,
what is, you know, what did you identify in this tumor genome?
They will read that nomenclature saying, oh, okay, this particular change in this BF gene,
this is significant.
We know that there are therapies that are out there that we can use to treat this patient
tumor.
So that's what this nomenclature system is about.
So it's a very complicated automated system.
- Yeah.
And it normalizes it if there's multiple ways to represent it and things like that.
Very nice.
All right.
This one I'm familiar with, OpenPyXL.
I guess you probably have a lot of data that either goes, comes from or goes, gets shared
out into Excel, right?
- Yes.
So what we do is we sort of are right now in our lab, we're kind of in this sort of,
you know, kind of an interim phase where we sometimes use Excel to look at some data.
So traditionally speaking before, you know, typically any lab that goes from, you know,
zero to the point where you have a web application that automates everything, the intermediate
phase is using a lot of Excel.
So it's very common in many labs to use Excel for a lot of different things, you know, for
QC, for charts, for tracking.
So we use this OpenPyXL for a few things.
One of them is when we have a lot of, you know, the sequencing data that we have to
summarize and then generate a QC to be able to present that, to essentially create an
Excel document on the fly from the backend to provide that, you know, whatever data they
want to look at in terms of statistics or, you know, list of variants or some form of,
you know, calculation they want to do further, that's where we use this package.
Typically we use it as part of our biofinance pipeline when we have to generate those things,
but it's a very handy tool.
We actually use something similar and I'm forgetting the name of the package that is
used to generate a document, like we use some Word documents for creating reports, but we
also use Python there to be able to summarize a lot of these data points and then create
a Word document that, you know, it starts with a template of a Word document and then
use Python to fill up all these, you know.
Right.
Here's where the graph goes.
Here's where the summary goes.
Here's where the detected, whatever it goes.
Yeah.
Right.
Cool.
So, yeah, I think there's a lot of things that overlap.
Are you familiar with this thing where scientists rename human genes to stop Excel from misreading
them?
Oh, yes.
Yes, absolutely.
Oh my gosh, this is crazy.
Yes.
Yes, it happens.
When we import a lot of this data coming from somewhere, we'll see entries like September
14th or March 19th.
Yeah, this is a big problem going in and out of Excel.
And so as much as you can do in Python or any proper programming language rather than
using Excel, but there was one that was M-A-R-C-H-1 or March 1.
Yes.
Or S-E-P-T-1.
It's very funny.
Some of the gene names are funny, but then Excel, you know, gets it to the next level
when it changes the names.
What a day, dude.
This doesn't make any sense.
Yeah.
Yeah, it doesn't make any sense.
All right.
On to the next one.
Hera.
Yes.
Hera, this is very interesting.
So this is where I think, you know, where in our instance, we are going away from standard
web applications, standard Biontronics pipeline to really touching DevOps using Python.
And so one of the things that typically we get to the point when we scale up our Biontronics
pipeline, where we have multiple samples and multiple runs and everything needs to be orchestrated
in a way where you have, you know, while you're running your pipeline, you have a lot of visibility
into how it works.
And so this is one of our projects we are working on to move our current Biontronics
pipeline the way it works, you know, kind of on a single server to be able to use the
Kubernetes cluster to actually deploy the long running pipelines onto that.
And so there are many options, you know, there are more standard sort of, you know, brittle
based kind of, you know, protocols that you can use to run on your cloud or HPC environments.
There is a very popular tool called Nextflow that is used to be able to, you know, kind
of create your data analysis pipeline.
Nextflow, you can sort of define that and then use any backend to deploy it.
One of the things that we kind of, when I was exploring the space, one of the things
I came across was, you know, the whole sort of ecosystem that Argo maintains with, you
know, Argo workflow and Argo CI/CD and all those things.
So workflow was interesting because Argo provides that way where you can sort of, you know,
write your pipelines in a YAML format and then have it, you know, deployed on the Kubernetes
cluster.
It really is very native to the Kubernetes cluster.
It sounds a little bit like Ansible, but for specifically for bio type of projects, right?
Yeah.
So Argo, so interesting thing is Argo, when, you know, when this Argo workflows was set
up really for a lot of CI/CD automations in mind.
So it is, yes, you can run data pipelines in general, but never, it was never, at least
in its description, it never describes use case of bioinformatics or, you know, biology
pipeline analysis.
And similarly, you know, it was like, okay, it's a generic tool.
You can use it for whatever you want.
So I tried it out with using, you know, like a YAML file and it was a simple four-step
pipeline.
It was wonderful.
It was magical.
And the good thing was with Argo, like the Argo workflow, when you install that on your
Kubernetes cluster, it comes with a native web interface.
So it's, you know, I'm sure if you've heard about the workflow option with Airflow.
So Airflow is a package that also, you know, there's a nice Python SDK for that, where
you have, you know, you deploy it on a Kubernetes cluster.
You have all these amazing visualizations to show what step you're on, or if there's
some error there, it'll do that.
Argo does the same thing.
So it has, obviously, the built-in capability to interact with it as an API, but then also
there's a web interface that it'll deploy and it can have visibility into every step
of the process.
It can summarize, it can see the entire tree.
So that was very interesting for us because we could get all that thing done in a single
thing, in a single go.
But then our challenge was, well, our desire was that if you could integrate that with
our LIMP system that we were working on using FastAPI, so that it was, hey, if there's any
Python SDK.
And so that's where Hedda comes in.
So Hedda essentially is a SDK, a wrapper that's essentially talking to Argo, but you can define
your pipeline steps as, you know, DAGs in Python.
And so that makes the process super simple, where you're now natively, essentially, we
can integrate that as a backend to our web application.
And so then it's almost like, you know, it's Python again, from start to finish, you're
not getting out of that.
And it's, again, it's a very well-maintained application.
So we are currently doing a validation to be able to make sure that, or demonstrate
that, you know, it's equally performant when we compare to a more sort of native shell-based
execution on the pipeline.
Okay.
Yeah, this is new to me.
Of course, I know Airflow, but not Hedda.
Cool.
All right.
Pi in sim, did I grab the right one here?
No, I think it's similar.
Let me see if I can send you the link.
Yeah, throw it in the private chat here and I'll pull it up.
Yeah.
Okay.
There we go.
In sim.
Yeah.
Okay.
Got it.
Yeah.
So this is a very interesting space in next generation sequencing assay or for high throughput
sequencing assays.
So what happens is, as I mentioned, that one of the things that is required for a clinical
lab is to be able to perform a validation on multiple samples of tumors that have certain
mutations.
And then you can demonstrate that, yes, the assay works because you have tested 100 samples
that have 300 different mutations or genetic alterations.
And then you can demonstrate that, yes, your pipeline or your assay was able to pick it
up.
So you can say that your assay is X percentage sensitive, X percentage specific, and your
recall rate and things like that.
So what happens is when you're trying to get those samples that have these very difficult
or challenging variants to detect because they're just complex in how they occur biologically
in the cell, it's very difficult.
Some of these are very rare.
They may be only two samples in the entire world.
Or it's just not possible practically to get those samples unless you wait for 10 years
to validate that.
So the idea is that if it is possible to be able to use algorithms which can manipulate
the existing sequence.
So for example, we have a sequence data from an existing real tumor sample.
But we can manipulate that in a way where we introduce these mutations in silicope.
So we can introduce SNBs or insertion deletion mutations and then use that same file to then
feed into our pipeline, bioinformatics pipeline and say, okay, run through the entire data
pipeline.
And then let's see if we are able to identify those variants that we inserted.
And so that's where the silicope mutagenesis comes in.
It's a very hot topic.
It's a very relevant topic of interest to really fill this large gap in terms of availability
of rare variants and their samples and how we can really improve some of these rare but
very clinically significant edge cases where we don't want to miss those variants and actually
see those in real tumor samples.
And so this is a Python package that was developed at the University of Chicago as part of their
clinical lab.
And so what really it does is it will take in a list of different mutations.
For example, in this plot, I think they give examples of insertion deletion, insertions
where you have extra sequence or deletion where you have certain sequence which are
missing or SNVs or single nucleotide variants where you have one nucleotide that got switched
with another one.
And so these are typically that we practically see in like real samples or real tumor samples,
but this is a way to mimic that in a sample that does not have it.
And so this Python package is able to take that list from you say, okay, I have a list
of these 20 important mutations that I know from the public databases have been reported,
but I want them to be inserted into my dataset that was created from say a set of three or
four real tumors and then use that to challenge the pipeline to say that, hey, can you still
pick it up?
And so that's what this does.
I see.
Simulate these rare changes and then test or exercise your setup.
Cool.
Right.
We've got a few more to cover, but I think we're getting a little bit short on time.
So let me just close this out with a final question for you, because I know this is the
topic du jour.
What does AI and LLMs look like for you guys?
Does it matter?
Is it really powerful?
Is it super important?
Genetics is kind of text data in a sense.
And so yes, sort of in the space of how it could apply.
Right.
It is a text data and it's a lot of, you know, there's a, when you talk about like
a search space, a lot of the search space is very text based.
You know, there is some numerical base, but there's a lot of text based search as well.
And I think across the entire spectrum from where we start with very raw sequencing data
to the point that we are trying to, you know, ask the question that, okay, I found this
rare or novel mutation in this particular gene.
What does it mean?
You know, what human has been described?
What disease does it relate to?
One of the things that we do as molecular pathologists, and this is sort of where a
lot of the medical work comes in, is where we really go through a lot of the medical
literature, what we have learned before, new publications, papers out there that, you know,
that have a lot of data in terms of, you know, studies that I've done on this particular
gene and they've described like, okay, these alterations actually activate the gene or
is bad for the tumor or, you know, makes it treatment resistant.
So you can see the natural, there's a lot of text as it happens.
And so in that space, we are seeing in the, I would say in the past, you know, three to
four years, there's been a lot of application of AI tools that have come out, you know,
particularly in the space of variant calling, where we have this genomic sequence data and
we're trying to identify variants.
You know, one of the examples that's been talked about a lot is the deep variant caller.
It's called deep variant from the team at Google who developed that.
That uses a lot of the AI techniques to be able to pick those things up.
There are some genomic databases that we use for in silico prediction.
For example, if you have a variant, we have no idea about it.
It uses, there's a database called dbscsnv that uses random forest techniques.
And I think it uses another algorithm to predict if a certain site where there is a mutation
can enhance abnormal mechanism called splicing versus not.
Similarly, there's a lot of tools that are coming in and the LLMs I think are, I would
say not mainstream, but I think there's a lot of interesting research that is coming
around there, where people are trying to use LLMs for doing these more broader text search
saying that, hey, you know, I have these, you know, I don't know, thousand articles,
and I want to find these particular combination of words that, you know, it's a combination
of a disease and a mutation and what do I get back out of that?
I personally tried, you know, ChatGPT with different, you know, like phrases and questions
about it.
What I've seen so far is, and this is purely my personal experience, I think a lot of it
reads very real, but when you start to look into the references as to what it references,
then you quickly figure out.
This is not the real deal.
And so I think, I think it's, you know, I'm not a very pessimistic person.
I'm saying, oh, no, this is all garbage.
But I think there is opportunity there.
It's just how do you train it?
Maybe there's a space or an opportunity and it probably already has been, people are pursuing
this as training a smaller model, but really deeply in genetics or is trying, not trying
to use a model that tries to understand everything.
Right, right.
Yeah, it's more, yeah, more in the medical literature or the genomic literature to be
able to like, training is an answer.
Yes.
So I think there's active work going on there.
But it's, yeah, it's, I think it's making, you know, a lot of, a lot of interesting research,
a lot of potential impact on how, you know, we do things.
And obviously the tool sets that we currently use, we might expect in the next 10 years
to change.
Yeah, for sure.
All right.
Final thought here.
People are listening.
They're maybe doing similar work to you.
How do they get started?
What would you tell them?
Get going with Python and some of these packages?
Yeah, I mean, I would, you know, my reflecting on my own experience sort of, you know, in
a very winded way that I ended up here.
I think, you know, Python is, I feel the program in general, and I think Python particularly
as a programming language is a very low, you know, sort of, you know, entry point in terms
of being able to really quickly get things done, like learn it easily and get things
done.
I think it should be, to me, anybody, anybody who's trying to pursue something in biology
or competition biology or bioinformatics, I think this is the first thing it's something
easy to do.
To be, you know, I would say relatively easy to do to be able to get from that.
Anybody with a desire to learn this has analytical thinking.
I mean, I think investing into Python is probably the best bet because you can pretty much do
anything you want.
That's what I tell, you know, when I tell train people in my lab or I talk to other
students is that if you want to spend your time, you have very little time because you're
busy, you know, with your other things.
I think the one thing that can get some of the job done and be still aligned with what
you're doing is Python.
And after that, I think it's, you know, it's a lot of self driven learning where, you know,
you kind of, you know, looking into things.
But the good thing is, I think the Python community is wonderful.
It's almost like I sit down and I think about, oh, I have to solve this problem.
Probably there are 50 other people who are thinking about that and maybe two people have
already worked on it.
So it's right.
They've already published it to PyPI and you're good to go.
Absolutely.
I totally agree with that.
And, you know, people should take the couple of weeks, get good at it and it'll amplify.
It'll save you time.
Definitely in the long run.
Oh, absolutely.
Yes.
The only thing that I, that I, the only thing I would say like an added thing is if somebody
is learning Python and then they do have an intention, you know, to take it to the point
where they will be involved in more serious, like, you know, application development or
maintaining an open source package or, you know, however they contribute to that.
I think learning a little bit more like learning Python in its real sense in terms of how to
do it right.
I think there are five ways of doing something correctly, but I think there's one way that
is consistent so that it's again, you know, easily shared, it's easily maintainable.
Others can easily understand.
I think that would be my second advice.
It is, it takes a little bit of time, but I think it's well worth the effort to spend
the time writing, you know, idiotic Python code.
So it's, it's portable.
Absolutely.
All right.
So, Mac, thank you for being on the show.
It's been great to get this look inside of what you all are doing with Python.
Yeah.
Thank you for having me on the show.
I appreciate that.
Yep.
Bye.